Good day I'm Norman Wildberger we're on our way
to examining and ultimately deflating the modern
theory of sets before I do that I would like to
give you a alternative point of view towards set
theory and in fact more generally to other kinds
of data structures in mathematics that's we're
going to start doing today so I want to set up
much more careful much more precise much more
concrete approach to how we organize things in
mathematics okay so set theory is an attempt to
organize mathematical objects at least that's
certainly one of its aims and this is parallel
to attempts to organize physical or real-life
objects to classify things to put things into
containers in such a way that the structure
is more accessible so there are also obvious
connections to computer science all right so I
remind you that the standard approach is that
well the fundamental kind of object is that of a
set and here's the standard way of thinking and
writing down a set it's an object that you get
by taking these curly brackets sometimes called
braces and then you put a few elements in and you
separate them by commas and we agree that this
notation means that this set is unordered that
is if we rearrange the order of these elements
the set has not changed and we also agree that
we're going to not allow repetitions so that
each one of these elements can only appear once
in the set all right in this video we're going to
look at sets but in the context of a wider view of
data structures more generally we're going to see
that sets are just one of four different types of
important types of data structures and we're also
going to introduce some novelty into the laying
out of this theory and in particular we're going
to have to say goodbye to this notation we're
going to let go of this notation for a set
now those of you have been watching my channel
for a while know that I'm not afraid of going
off in different directions and introducing new
notation and ideas if they're necessary and this
is a situation where it is I think necessary
to have another look at exactly how we write
things down notation is very important in aligning
with our understanding allowing us to move forward
smoothly so here's a chart that lays out the four
different possible kinds of data structures that
we're going to be emphasizing today okay so
there are actually four kinds of objects call
sets ordered sets multi sets and lists and they're
characterized by these two different properties
the property of either being unordered or ordered
and the other property of being either without
repetition or with repetition so let's have a
look at these four possibilities the one that
we're mostly familiar with is that of a set which
as we've said is an unordered object it doesn't
matter if we permute the elements and it's also
without repetition we do not allow things to be
repeated now have a look at this new notation for
a set okay still has the curly brackets or braces
but now there are no longer commas separating the
elements there are just spaces this suggests that
the elements are in fact not in a particular order
they are kind of freely floating inside this box
so the absence of commas makes it easier for us
to appreciate that we can rearrange the order of
these things and the set is not changing set in
quotation marks so we haven't actually defined
these things here I'm just introducing the general
framework and the notation that we are going to be
using for these four kinds of things once we get
around to defining what they are precisely which
I will do later on okay a variant of that is this
thing here which is an ordered set okay so this is
a same kind of notation that we're actually
familiar with but we're going to agree that
this means something which has no repetitions but
which is ordered the presence of the commas means
that we're seeing a first element a second element
and a third element so it's like a set which has
been ordered and the order is fixed over here is
something which we call a multi set which is like
a set in that it's unordered but it's different
from a set and that repetitions are allowed so
here we see a 1 a 1 4 & 2 there's no commas
these things are freely floating around here
we can rearrange the order but we are allowing
two ones and the brackets now that we have are
different from the ones that we had there we have
actual brackets instead of braces and it's this
bracket notation or convention that's going to
signify for us that we are allowing repetitions
and the fourth possibility is when we consider
a data structure where repetitions are allowed
and which is also ordered and that's a list so a
list like 1 1 4 2 is given in the square brackets
the same as a multiset but now the commas here
are alerting us to the fact that this thing is
ordered there's a first one there's a second
one there's a third one and there's a fourth
one so I'm proposing that we adopt this notation
- generally speaking deal with these 4 different
types of data structures yes it's unconventional
yes it also makes a lot of sense so when it's a
matter of convention versus making sense which
direction are we gonna go in at this channel
you all know common sense Trump's convention so
this is the way we're going to think about sets
order sets multi sets at lists once we define
what they actually are okay so to reinforce
what I've just said we've introduced these for
notational devices braces to represent a data
structure where repetitions are not allowed and
square brackets to represent a data structure
where repetitions are allowed so curly brackets
no repetitions square brackets repetitions okay
and we're also introducing the idea that a
space between elements represents the fact
that those elements are unordered we can permute
them around there freely floating inside the box
there's no structure or container aspects inside
the box compartments there aren't any compartments
these things are just they're separated by space
allowing them to move around that's unordered and
if we want something that's ordered first a
second a third we're going to separate those
elements by commas I'm going to put them in
the right order with commas separating okay
so let's just solidify our understanding of these
things and have a look at some examples so do we
have sets ordered sets multi sets or lists here
okay what about a well the curly brackets means
that repetitions are not allowed and there's
spaces here so it's unordered so its unordered
repetitions are not allowed this is a set how
about this thing here well the square brackets
means that repetitions are allowed and the commas
means that things are ordered so this is a list
how about this thing it's got some curly
brackets so it's without repetitions and does
it have spaces or commas well we can't really say
because there's only one element of the element
2:27 so this could be a set or it could also be an
ordered set maybe I'll write o set for ordered set
the form of it is not completely defining what
kind of object it is how about this thing here
B equals square bracket seven so square brackets
means the repetitions are allowed so this could
be a multi set or it could be the beginnings of
a list but we don't know whether there's spaces
or commas that's not really relevant because
again there's only one element how about this
thing here C equals 5 4 3 spaced with commas now
this is the traditional notation for a set but
in our notation these curly brackets means that
it's without repetitions and the commas means
that it's actually ordered so this is actually
an ordered set alright all set it's not a set
it's an ordered set how about this thing here
the square brackets means that repetitions are
allowed but there are no commas there are spaces
so we can move things around this is a multi set
how about this thing here just square brackets
with nothing inside it well that's probably
going to be a little bit ambiguous because it's
square brackets meaning that repetitions are in
principle allowed but there's no elements that
are being repeated but they're with us this could
be either a multiset or a list so the empty multi
set or the empty list if we're eventually going to
define those things how about this thing here it
is a bit more complicated it's got square brackets
and commas that means it's a list okay the square
brackets means that repetitions are allowed this
case there aren't any repetitions but nevertheless
repetitions would be allowed and the comma means
that it's ordered so this is a list in fact it's a
list containing two elements the first element is
a set or an ordered set and the second element is
a list also and finally down here J we have square
brackets so that's with repetition so it's either
a multi set or a list we look are there spaces or
commas there are spaces that means it's a multi
set we can move things around so it's a multi
set or M set in fact it does have some repetition
you see that one of its elements is the multi set
to three and that element is the same as this
one here this one looks different but this as
is multi set because it's separated with a space
those two in threes so this multi set and this
multi said they're actually the same so J itself
is a multi set with three elements but these two
happen to be the same okay we have not yet defined
exactly what we mean by sets ordered sets lists or
multi sets okay we are just establishing at this
point notation for those things that were about to
introduce I want to emphasize the notation first
to get you used to the idea that we can structure
data with curly brackets or square brackets
and with spaces or commas and that each one of
those things can mean something separate so that
we're covering all four possibilities ordered or
unordered with repetitions or without repetitions
it's nice if mathematics reflects the real world
and these four kinds of data structures are very
much reflecting what actually happens in the real
world and they're very useful for us to apply
to various situations to organize things okay
so let's have a look at some examples of data
structures in real life and sort of correlate
them with one of these four types of mathematical
data structures that I've outlined just to give
us a preliminary sense of how these things can
be used okay there's a little bit of ambiguity
here because we're talking about the real world
possibly one could reinterpret the questions and
so on okay so suppose you have people in a company
you have some big company and we're interested in
the collection of all people now what kind of a
collection is that well first of all is it ordered
is there a naturally a first person the second
person a third person up to a three thousandth
person no it's probably not there might be a CEO
and so on but sort but it's not true that we can
give a linear ordering to all the people so it's
a essentially an unordered structure and what
about repetitions are we allowed to have two
different people which are actually the same
no all the people in the company are distinct so
this is an example of a set how about the names
of people in the company so we take that same
company and we just write down all the names of
all the people again this is unordered but now
there's definitely the possibility especially
if it's a big company that a couple of different
people are going to have the same name so this
could be repetition in the names of the people
that makes it a multiset or absent for short how
about words in a dictionary so just the list
of words the a words the B words the C words
and so on well those words are all distinct
and they're definitely ordered because that's
the whole point of a dictionary so we have
distinct words which are ordered that's an
ordered set which poured short we might say is
an O set how about letters in a word okay so we
look at the word and we look at the letters in
that word well that is definitely ordered but
example if I the word happens to be letters
then there's naturally a first letter and the
second letter and so on so it's naturally
ordered and repetitions are in principle
allowed because I let letter can appear more
than once in a word so this is naturally a list
how about webpages look at all the web
pages that are around well they're all
distinct they have different URLs and are
they ordered no they're not ordered so this
is a situation where we have distinct
things which are unordered this is a
set how about images found on the Internet
just look at all the images that are found
in the internet again unordered but it's very
possible to find the same image in different
places so we have repetitions unordered but
with repetitions that's a multiset or M scent
okay what about primes from 2 to 19 okay
well you can think about this different
ways but probably the more natural is to think
of it as something that's bordered because it
is sort of recently naturally ordered in
terms of increasing size and they're all
distinct as well so this is really an ordered
set primarily I suppose or Oh set for a short
and finally the bus numbers that arrive at a
stop so you are at a stop and buses are coming
and just recording the numbers of the buses that
come well obviously there's an order to it and
repetitions can occur because the same bus
number can come consecutively sometimes so
repetitions are allowed but it's ordered so this
is a list well it's fun to look around different
examples in real life you might like to do this
yourself have a look at various things that come
around and say well is this particular thing
a set an order set a multi set or a list just
to get used to thinking in terms of these four
different categories ordered or unordered with
repetitions or without repetitions alright so
while there are a wide variety of different
kinds of elements that occur in real life
data structures for us we want to constrain
ourselves to a much more precise and sort of
concrete framework so we're going to work at
least initially with natural numbers and natural
numbers augmented slightly to include zero when
we do that we'll put a little plus sign over
the type to specify that we're including zero
and we're going to agree that since we want
to be able to you know communicate completely
precisely with each other that we're going to
restrict ourselves to the hindu-arabic form of
a natural number so if n is in natural numbers
or K is in natural numbers augmented with zero
there's only one way of writing such a number
down so let me illustrate that with an example
so N equals 13 okay this is the hindu-arabic form
for the number thirteen three ones 110 okay so
we're going to like this way of representing
things we're going to agree that as far as set
they're in billing upset theory is concerned these
other ways of representing thirteen are not going
to be allowed so we are not going to allow that
this thirteen is represented in a data structure
by the expression twelve plus one or by the
expression 1 plus 1 plus 1 plus 1 etcetera
plus four or by some statement like n is the
smallest prime greater than twelve or by some even
more ambiguous statement like n his marries lucky
number because if we allow that kind of thing then
we would have to have a secondary whole discussion
about what kinds of expressions are allowed and
how to tell whether your expression is the same as
Jerry's expression is the same as my expression we
don't want to do that so we want to agree that
there's exactly one way of specifying a natural
number and in the same spirit if K is fifty seven
thousand one hundred and nine we're going to agree
here in this discussion that we're gonna represent
that this way in particular without commas ok so
we're gonna go for that expression we are not
going to allow an expression where there's commas
because we're going to use commas to separate
elements in things like lists or ordered sets
and if we have commas in the numbers there's at
least possibility of confusion as to which meaning
the comma is being used for so let's just agree
that when we represent a number in hindu-arabic
form we just write it in the usual form without
any comments anywhere and also we're not going to
allow decimals so although in ordinary life
this is the same as this to all intents and
purposes but us when we're actually representing
numbers in our data structures we're not going to
use this form to represent that natural number
okay so we're just gonna make this agreement so
that means that there's only one way of writing
down a natural number we can all agree on that
so let's start our first data structure perhaps
surprisingly is not going to be a set we're going
to start with the idea of a list in particular
we're gonna start with something that we call a K
list okay so the setup is that for N and K natural
numbers okay so we choose an N and we choose okay
we're going to define a K list from N and so this
is the object that we are about to define what it
means to have a K list from n like a 3 list from
5 or a 17 list from 3,000 okay that's going to be
defined to be an expression of the form l equals
square brackets inside m1 comma M 2 comma M 3
comma and so on come all the way up to MK where
each of these M eyes is a natural number and
furthermore is somewhere between 1 and n so the
range of possible values for these elements is 1
to N restricting ourselves to only natural numbers
and there are altogether K of them so we've chosen
N and K to begin with the N tells us the range of
values that the elements can take on and K tells
us how many there are going to be so this is a new
type of mathematical object which we are going to
call lists and lists n K because it depends
on N and on K so for example here is such a
K list this is actually a 3 list because as three
elements it's an element of list for three so the
actual elements are in the range one two three and
four and they're ordered because there are commas
it's a list because there are commas and square
brackets some element of list four three so this
is a three list a three list from four here is
a one list from say fifteen it's also a one list
from fourteen and also a one list from thirteen it
has one element it's got square brackets so that's
a modified one list from fifteen here's a four
list from five there are four elements but there's
some repetition but they're ordered ordered with
repetition allowed we're talking about a list so
this is an example of a four list from five
and here's an example of a four list from two
okay so the the conventions are very important
we're talking about square brackets we're talking
about having the elements separated by commas
that's our convention for a list and now we're
being more precise we're saying that we're not
going to talk about a general list we're going
to only talk about a K list from n that's what
we know we have so far we do not have the general
notion of what a list is we only have the notion
of what a K list from n is for a particular K and
n which are natural numbers okay here we come to
a little bit of a subtle point so we define what
we mean by elements of a list so the objects which
are natural numbers M 1 up to M K which appear in
the K list l equals M 1 M 2 up to n K are called
the elements of L so M 1 is an element of L M 2
is an element of L all the way up to M K is an
element of L each one of those is an element of
L they are considered as distinct elements even
if as numbers they are the same or equal so this
is a bit of a subtle point so let's look at an
example so here's a four list L it's 3 1 3 2 it's
a list there's some repetition there's two threes
there okay so this thing has four elements that's
an element that's an element that's an element
and that's an element when we write them out
as elements you can say well these two are the
same really there should only be perhaps three
elements but no we're not going to say there are
three elements we're going to say that there are
four elements because we're going to regard this 3
and this 3 as being distinct even if they are the
same as numbers and then we're going to define the
size of the K list L to be the number of elements
namely K so if we have a K list then the size
of that K list is necessarily K independent of
what the elements are so I think I could provide
a lot of evidence for the claim that the list is
actually the most fundamental data structure the
list is actually more fundamental than that of a
set or the other ones so then we move to another
one which is the ordered set so this is a variant
of a list where all the elements now are required
to be distinct so an ordered set is a list all
whose elements have to be distinct so here's the
official definition and it follows the same kind
of agenda as for lists so for N and K natural
numbers K ordered set from n he is an expression
of this form o equals ok now there's our brace
brackets curly brackets with an m1 comma M 2
comma M 3 come all the way up to comma MK so it's
just like a list except that it has curly brackets
instead of square brackets and the curly brackets
are telling us that repetition is not allowed so
each of the mi has to be a natural number still
has to be within the range 1 to N because this is
a K order set from n but now there's an additional
requirement that the Mir all distinct and we
can say that that mi is not equal to MJ if I is
not equal to J here is an example o equals they
ordered set 1 comma 3 comma 5 this is an ordered
set 5 3 so it's actually a 3 o set from 5 and it
has 3 elements which is the K so we also use the
same convention for size as we do for lists all
right so from now on a thing like this is actually
an ordered set the commas here of representing the
fact that we have decided to order the elements
that's in fact what the commas sort of do for us
don't they the commas are ordering the sets so
it's no longer the case that here we're going to
be allowed to interchange these things and say
oh it's the same thing no the commas mean that
the order matters so another variant of a list
in a sort of different direction is that of a
multiset where the order is no longer important
but repetitions are still allowed so here's our
definition we're going to talk about K multi-sets
and again starting with N and K natural numbers at
a multi set from n is an expression of the form M
equals square brackets M 1 M 2 all the way up to
M K where now there are only spaces between the
elements M 1 M 2 and so on there are no longer
commas so this kind of expression is defining a
new kind of object which we'll call an M set and
K and the the M's have to satisfy the following
thing so they have to be natural numbers and as
before they have to be within the range 1 to N
and now in addition the order of the elements mi
is unimportant if we interchange the position of
M 2 and M 1 then we agree that the multi set has
not changed so we need to change any two elements
we can rearrange those K elements however we like
and we agree that we have the same multiset so
for example here is a multiset 1 3 3 1 15 it's
the same as the multiset 15 1 3 1 3 same elements
different order so we say that this is a multi
set or a 5 multi set from 15 and this is the type
that will use em set 15 5 and the size of em is as
before the number of elements in here which is 5
even though these 3 appears twice these are both
counted separately when we're talking about the
number of elements ok and finally what is a set
well in this context we're gonna talk about cake
sets again the starting point N and K natural
numbers so we're going to define a K set from
n to be an expression of the form s equals the
curly brackets m1 m2 all the way up to MK with
only spaces between the elements mi it's going
to define a new kind of type called set MK and
the condition on the M is well as before each
of the M eyes are natural numbers they're all in
the range 1 to N and they're all supposed to be
distinct just as they were for an order set but
now in addition their order is unimportant there
are no longer commas between them as we have for
an ordered set so now that means you can rearrange
them without changing the nature of the object so
for example s equals 13 7 2 which is the same as
2 7 13 this is a 3 set from 13 so we can write its
belongs to set 13 3 and the size of the set is the
K value which is 3 in this case so notice that
the order of the four types that we introduced
started with lists that are ordered set then he
said then set the set was at in fact the last one
and it's really the most complicated one it's
the most complicated because the conditions on
the M is there's two conditions we want them
to be all distinct in practice that requires
a lot of checking and we want their order to be
unimportant that means you have to have some way
of being able to tell whether somebody has come
along and pre muted your trillion elements in your
data set and you know and whether it's still the
same or not so from a computer science point of
view a list is much simpler than a set so we're
kind of going in order of maybe complexity from
a computer science point of view okay so there's
a lot more to be done now so we've at least have
an initial orientation framework for dealing with
data structures of as admittedly very specific and
focused kind but it will turn out that each one
of these four types of data structures supports
a very rich theory very rich combinatorial theory
and we're going to talk about that so we'll have
plenty of evidence to show you that this is
very rich topic here and we don't need any
kind of fanciful axioms okay there's no axioms
in sight we're just defining things everybody
can agree everybody knows exactly once you've
adopted the conventions that you know this is a
set but not a multi set there's the possibility of
really having a broad agreement right across the
board here that's what we want in pure mathematics
doesn't have to depend on philosophical positions
or axiomatic systems or other belief systems
when I get rid of all that okay so next time
we're going to start building up some of the
additional theories that each one of these data
structures supports I hope you'll join me for
that I'm Norman Wildberger thanks for listening